---
layout: post
title: "What do I think about AirBnB?"
categories: [nyc , neweconomy, data]
tags: [python, plot.ly]
---

A new [AiRBnB study](https://www.airbnbaction.com/how-airbnb-can-support-low-income-neighborhoods-in-nyc/) came out recently and I felt compelled to respond. Dumping the entirety of my thoughts on AirBnB's role in the city - and NYC in particular - is overwhelming and will take more free time than I have. Instead I'd like to focus on one facet of AirBnB's PR strategy that I've seen over and over, including in the aforementioned study.

AirBnB's claim to being a socially responsible company seems to be that they empower ordinary people to make a little extra money by renting some or part of their full-time housing on the short-term market. Let's just put aside the conversation about whether this kind of thing should be allowable or not and take AirBnB up on this premise for a moment.

Even if this is true, it's not reflective of the platform AirBnB runs. Using data from [insideairbnb](http://www.insideairbnb.com) , I used a simple model to estimate how much revenue each active listing on the site pulls in annually. This allowed me to make what I've seen referred to as a 'whale chart': a kind of cumulative distribution that plots the percentage of a total variable of interest e.g., AirBnB revenue that is captured by a percentage of unique listings. They serve as a way to visualize market structure; a whale chart that is very steep near the left side of the picture shows a market dominated by a few large actors (think sperm whale). A more egalitarian market structure would have a more gentle hump (maybe a humpback whale?).

A whale chart is compelling because it becomes easy to see that relatively few listings pull in most of the revenue. Just look at Bed-Stuy. The AirBnB market in this neighborhood is dominated by 20% of listings that seem to pull in over 65% of the revenue. Conversely, 25% of active listings in 2015 didn't seem to earn any money!

<iframe width="100%" height="500" align="middle" frameborder="50" scrolling="no" src="https://plot.ly/~s_rimmele/50.embed?share_key=pJIkh7YjpMsPWSDTpE4Zvo"></iframe>


AirBnB is not in the business of helping ordinary people earn a little extra money by renting out their apartments occasionally. AirBnB is in the business of building a platform for (a small number of) commercial operators that drive a huge proportion of total listings and revenue for the company. Helping the little guy earn extra money on the side is not what earned AirBnB a $30 billion dollar valuation; it is incidental at best. It strikes me as intellectually dishonest for AirBnB to keep pushing the little guy narrative. I challenge AirBnB to make a serious effort at eliminating commercial listings on the site (it's not that hard) and become the company it claims so vocally to be.

**Data Footnote**: *My revenue data is modeled because AirBnB doesn't release this type of data. As such, it is vulnerable to bias and error. I also challenge AirBnB to prove me wrong and release data showing listing revenue (and by extension AirBnB's own revenue) is not driven by a small subset of likely commercial actors.*
