---
layout: post
title: "A Tale of K Cities"
categories: [nyc, data]
tags: [R, k-means clustering]
---

Here's a little project I did running clustering algorithms on New York City neighborhoods. Anybody who lives in the five boroughs knows certain neighborhoods are more like others, whether for cultural, economic, or other reasons. I fed a bunch of sociological and economic data from the American Community Survey (ACS) into a K-means clustering algorithm and asked it to identify three distinct types of neighborhoods in the city. What makes this interesting is I didn't feed the model any underlying structure (this is unsupervised learning). Nevertheless, the results match a lot of my qualitative priors established from living in NYC for the past eight years. So what do I think the clustering algorithm found?

* **Cluster 1**: Manhattan south of 110th Street and Downtown Brooklyn AKA the first 100 pages of a tourist guide to NYC.
* **Cluster 2**: Low-to-middle income neighborhoods in the boroughs (and Lower East Side in Manhattan), usually with high minority and foreign-born populations. Also the center of ongoing gentrification. Maybe a few pages in the back of the travel guide.
* **Cluster 3**:  Staten Island + other working-middle class neighborhoods in the far boroughs. These are the areas the travel guides seem to completely ignore.

<iframe width="100%" height="520" frameborder="0" src="https://srimmele.carto.com/viz/8daedcd2-1c96-11e7-b055-0e05a8b3e3d7/embed_map" allowfullscreen webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen oallowfullscreen msallowfullscreen></iframe>

What's the conclusion here? I was struck by how a simple algorithm with relatively little data was able to find some underlying structure. It's also interesting that traditional understandings of 'place' - like geography and physical distance - may not be the most salient aspects when defining neighborhoods in relation to another. In many ways the Lower East Side of Manhattan seems more like Bed-Stuy in Brooklyn than the rest of lower Manhattan, which it abuts. Of course all of this is to ignore incredibly important cultural histories of place that aren't reflected in a snapshot of data like the ACS. Data will always have context that an algorithm cannot incorporate.

**edit 7-23-2017:**  I've also posted the [underlying R code.]({% post_url 2017-07-23-NYC_clustering_code %}) for all of this work.
